# Run Directions
Creation of code was done using Visual Studio Code and a Makefile for compilation 

Compile code with command: 
  make
  compilation will create a obj folder for all .o files generated by compilation

Run original Differential Evolution algorithm with command: 
  ./main 0

Run my Adaptive Differential Evolution algorithm with command: 
  ./main 1

**Output**
Outputs Testbed 1-3 metrics with following format:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Testbed <number> Results
test name: <function name>, nfe: <total nfe count>
.
.
.
Testbed Modern Results
test name: <function name>, nfe: <total nfe count>
-----------------------------------------------------------------

# Differential_Evolution_Optimization
The premise behind Differential Evolution is to approximate the global minimum of an objective function through repeated mutation, crossover, and selection on a population of candidate vectors. DE first generates NP randomly distributed vectors throughout the parameter space, forming the initial population for the first generation. Once the initial population has been generated, each vector in the population is selected once as the target vector. For each target vector, xi, three unique vectors are chosen randomly from the population, labeled: xr1, xr2, xr3. From these vectors a mutant vector, vi, defined as 
vi = xr1 + F(xr2 - xr3)
where F is a user-defined scaling factor between 0 and 2 that controls the amplification of the differential variation between xr2 and xr3. After the mutant vector vi is generated, crossover is performed between the target vector xi and the mutant vector, vi according to the crossover rate CR, where CR is another user-defined value between 0 and 1. The crossover produces a trial vector ui. The trial vector ui​ is then evaluated by the objective function where its cost is compared against that of the target vector xi. If the trial vector has a lower cost than the target, it survives into the next generation; otherwise, the target vector moves onto the preceding generation. This process continues until a stopping condition is reached, such as a convergence to a tolerance, a maximum number of generations, or a maximum number of function evaluations. Ultimately, the DE algorithm outputs a solution vector along with performance measures such as the number of function evaluations NFE, which indicates how many times the objective function was evaluated during the search process.
An extension of the Differential Evolution algorithm was implemented for the purposes of this final project. This extension introduced an adaptive DE variant that excluded the requirement for user-defined F and CR values. While the DE algorithm achieves convergence of all objective functions quicker than ASA and ANM algorithms, DE still requires a human to define values, and choosing different combinations of values can lead to longer run times, problems achieving convergence, and overall performance and time delays. 
Adaptive DE is initialized by default to F = 0.5 and CR = 0.1, with probabilities of 0.1 for both values being changed throughout the life of the algorithm. The probability of 0.1 was chosen to give the algorithm a chance to change the values throughout the algorithm, but it is not so aggressive that F and CR change sporadically and disrupt convergence. More specifically, for each target vector, the algorithm begins with the currently stored F and CR values associated with that vector. Then, with probability 0.1, F is reassigned to a new random value between 0.1 and 0.9, and with probability 0.1, CR is reassigned to a new random value between 0 and 1. If these newly chosen values produce a trial vector that performs better than the current target vector, those F and CR values are kept and carried forward with that vector into the next generation. Otherwise, the target vector survives and the previous parameter values remain unchanged. This allows the algorithm to preserve parameter values that lead to improvement while still occasionally exploring new combinations that may perform better on difficult objective functions.

